Storing all data related to a problem in a single table or data frame ("the dataset") can result in many repetitive values. Separation into multiple tables helps data quality but poses a different challenge: if information from different tables is required jointly, a "merge" or "join" operation must be carried out. {dm} is a new package that fills a gap in the R ecosystem: it makes working with multiple tables just as easy as working with a single table.

In the relational database model, a "data model" consists of:

- tables (both the definition and the data),

- primary and foreign key constraints.

Primary keys uniquely identify rows in a table. Foreign keys establish a link between rows in two tables. The {dm} package combines these concepts with data manipulation powered by the tidyverse: entire data models are handled in a single entity, a "dm" object.

We can identify three principal use cases:

Three principal use cases can be identified: consuming a data model, building in-memory or local data models without relying on relational databases, and preparing consistent relational data models for consumption by others.

1. As a consumer of a data model, a dataset consisting of multiple tables in a database or multiple data frames is accessed and manipulated through a consistent interface. Operations on dm objects allow to manipulate the tables in the data model and the definition of derived tables.

2. When using a third-party dataset, it pays off to remove redundancies by normalizing the data as part of the cleaning process. The {dm} package helps maintaining keys and relationships without having to rely on an external database.

3. As a creator of relational data models, you can prepare the data using R and tools you are familiar with. The data model can be checked for referential integrity before being copied to a database, where it can be consumed e.g. by Power BI.

The presentation revolves around these use cases and shows a few applications. The {dm} package is available on GitHub and will be submitted to CRAN in early February.
